#Lecture: Garnet Hertz on Rethinking Tech
Danielle Morgan on March 6, 2015   Makerspace 
<p>In partnership with the <a title="learn more" href="http://pactac.net/" target="_blank">Pacific Centre for Technology and Culture</a>, we are happy to announce Garnet Hertz&#8217;s March 18th lecture at UVic. Details and poster below. Hope to see you there!</p>
<hr />
<p><strong>Rethinking Technology: Art and Design</strong><br />
Garnet Hertz, Emily Carr University<br />
Wednesday 18 March at 2:30pm<br />
Pacific Centre for Technology and Culture (PACTAC)<br />
Technology Enterprise Facility (TEF) 170<br />
Public Lecture, sponsored by PACTAC and the Maker Lab</p>
<p>Hertz will give an introduction to his studio work that spans electronic art and industrial design, and provide a background in how humanities-based modes of critical inquiry&#8212;like the arts and ethics&#8212;can be directly applied to building more engaging objects, concepts, and information technologies. A map of some key concepts in this field will be provided, including critical making (Ratto), critical technical practice (Agre), reflective design (Sengers), near futures (Bleecker), critical design (Dunne and Raby), values in design (Nissenbaum), tactical media (Lovink), and adversarial design (DiSalvo). These approaches to research combine creative and academic research practices, and support the development of knowledge and innovation through artistic expression, scholarly investigation, and critically informed experimentation. Through this work, Hertz aims to put aside traditional engineering goals of efficiency, speed, or usability in favour of more complex cultural, social, and human-oriented values. The end result are objects that not only challenge our assumptions around technology but are also culturally relevant, socially engaged, and interesting.</p>
<p>Dr. Garnet Hertz is Canada Research Chair in Design and Media Arts and Associate Professor in the Faculty of Design and Dynamic Media at Emily Carr. His art and research explore themes of DIY culture and interdisciplinary art / design practices. He has shown his work at several notable international venues in thirteen countries, including SIGGRAPH, Ars Electronica, and DEAF. He was awarded the 2008 Oscar Signorini Award in robotic art. Hertz is founder of Dorkbot SoCal, a monthly Los Angeles-based lecture series on DIY culture, electronic art, and design. He has worked at Art Center College of Design and University of California Irvine. His research is widely cited in academic publications, and popular press on his work has been disseminated through 25 countries, including <em>The New York Times</em>, <em>Wired</em>, <em>The Washington Post</em>, NPR, <em>USA Today</em>, NBC, CBS, TV Tokyo, and CNN Headline News. More about Hertz&#8217;s work at <a href="http://conceptlab.com/" target="_blank">conceptlab.com</a>.</p>
<hr />
<p>Post by <a title="learn more" href="http://maker.uvic.ca/author/danielle">Danielle Morgan</a>, attached to the <a title="learn more" href="http://maker.uvic.ca/category/makerspace/">Makerspace</a> project, with the <a title="learn more" href="http://maker.uvic.ca/tag/news/">news</a> tag. Images for this post care of Danielle Morgan.</p>
