#Why Fabricate?
Jentery Sayers on January 27, 2015   Makerspace 
<p><em>Below is a copy of a paper I submitted for the INKE-hosted gathering at Whistler, <a href="http://inke.ca/projects/whistler-gathering-2015/" target="_blank">&#8220;Sustaining Partnerships to Transform Scholarly Production,&#8221;</a> which is taking place today. Thanks to Ray Siemens and the INKE team for giving me the opportunity to share this work. I very much regret not being able to attend the conference.</em></p>
<p>In the following paragraphs, I explore some responses to a single question: <em>why, if ever, should humanities practitioners fabricate tactile objects as part of their research?</em> Under the umbrella of fabrication I am including 3D printing, CNC machining, and laser engraving/cutting, and&#8212;before I proceed&#8212;I should confess that my question is subtended by a rather fragile warrant: that, for the purposes of scholarly communication, <span class="pullquote">most humanities practitioners render 3D media 2D.</span> Books, pages, and websites are flattened in the interests of reference; they frequently become text without texture or substance without substrate. In this sense, my line of inquiry is influenced by Nick Montfort&#8217;s <a href="http://nickm.com/writing/essays/continuous_paper_mla.html" target="_blank">&#8220;Continuous Paper&#8221; </a>(2004) and Matthew Kirschenbaum&#8217;s materialist interpretation of it in <a href="http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/mechanisms" target="_blank"><em>Mechanisms</em></a> (2008). My presumed flatland is also accompanied by several concerns I have about digital fabrication&#8217;s conceptualization and practice in the humanities, concerns that are anchored in fabrication work I have done with a variety of machines. (For an example of how I teach fabrication at UVic, see the <a href="http://uvicmakerlab.github.io/dhum250/" target="_blank">Spring 2014 iteration of Digital Humanities 250</a> for undergraduate students across the arts, humanities, sciences, and social sciences.)</p>
<p>First and foremost, <span class="pullquote">I worry that techniques such as 3D printing are mostly whiz-bang in the humanities.</span> For many, this concern is probably obvious. &#8220;A glue gun tethered to a computer is all neat factor? You don&#8217;t say!&#8221; Echoing Liz Losh (2014), researchers and instructors have many good reasons to be skeptical of gadgets. For instance, in <a href="http://casit.bgsu.edu/cconline/hacking/#losh" target="_blank">&#8220;Ten Principles for a Hacktivist Pedagogy,&#8221;</a> Losh writes: &#8220;The advent of cheaper gadgets, such as Raspberry Pi, to teach programming is certainly exciting. A computer smaller than a pack of cards where the chip and circuits are laid bare seems a liberating device in that it avoids the appearance of the consumer electronics industry and the slick blackboxed technologies that it mass-markets. Yet Raspberry Pi is also a gadget, and like all devices intended to make the evangelical mission of disseminating technoculture easier, there is a complicated history of One-Laptop-Per-Child thinking.&#8221; In this excerpt, you could easily replace &#8220;Raspberry Pi&#8221; and its specs with &#8220;MakerBot&#8221; and its features, and the quibbles would still hold.</p>
<p>But most important, Losh&#8217;s awareness of the evangelical missions of popular maker culture strikes me as compelling. With Raspberry Pi, MakerBot, and other maker-targeted technologies, there&#8217;s a rush to see what the gadget can do, often without consideration of context, history, or relevance. <span class="pullquote">The means can determine the modes, and wow can eclipse why.</span> True, desire and novelty always play a role in technocultures, but ignoring or denying their force risks bypassing their importance. As Wendy Chun suggests in <a href="http://www.routledge.com/books/details/9780415942249/" target="_blank">&#8220;Did Somebody Say New Media?&#8221;</a> (2005), we must thoroughly consider what enables desire and novelty, from cultural biases and ideological motivations to how we are &#8220;entangled&#8221; in the the actualities and experiences of platforms (Chun 9). After all, these entanglements really matter for humanities researchers and partnerships, especially when our budgets and infrastructures are limited. Such, then, is the antinomy at hand: experimenting with gadgets is a luxury few humanities practitioners can afford, yet experimentation is fundamental to researching beyond wow and whiz-bang.</p>
<p>My second concern borrows from a long legacy of demystification in media and cultural studies: whiz-bang aside, <span class="pullquote">how well do these fabrication machines actually work?</span> Beyond the polish and allure of industry advertising, what is the maintenance involved? What are the demands on practitioner time, resources, and labor? Although I am not asserting that technologies should always be user-friendly, invisible, or conducive to productivity, I am underscoring the risk of thinking about computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) as a plug-and-play process. As Jonathan Sterne notes on various occasions, including several key moments in <a href="https://www.dukeupress.edu/The-Audible-Past/" target="_blank"><em>The Audible Past</em></a> (2003), machines routinely need help from their operators. All is never automated. This operator assistance did not cease with the hand-cranked technologies of yore. Based on my experiences with digital fabrication thus far, desktop 3D printing machines demand quite a bit of your attention, from machine assembly and file processing to debugging and extruder cleaning. By extension, they raise numerous questions about waste and eco-critical uses of technologies: how are fabrication materials sourced, by whom, for whom, and where? How can existing materials be reused, repurposed, or recycled? And what should we do with failed prints and discards? For now, effect-driven observations that <a href="http://www.theguardian.com/sustainable-business/2014/nov/03/tapping-into-the-potential-of-3d-printing-to-reduce-plastic-waste" target="_blank">3D printing could reduce waste</a> should be balanced with an attention to the means, operation, and labor of digital fabrication. Prints do not happen auto-magically, and the machines do not maintain (let alone replicate) themselves.</p>
<p>Consequently, humanities practitioners interested in fabrication likely have much to learn from human-computer interaction and social computing scholars, such as <a href="http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~daniela/files/cscw14-rosner-repair.pdf" target="_blank">Daniela Rosner</a> (2014), <a href="http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~daniela/files/cscw14-rosner-repair.pdf" target="_blank">Morgan G. Ames</a> (2014), <a href="http://sjackson.infosci.cornell.edu/Jackson&amp;Kang_BreakdownObsolescenceReuse(CHI2014).pdf" target="_blank">Stephen J. Jackson</a> (2014), and <a href="http://sjackson.infosci.cornell.edu/Jackson&amp;Kang_BreakdownObsolescenceReuse(CHI2014).pdf" target="_blank">Laewoo Kang</a> (2014), who are collectively interested in maintenance and repair. For example, Rosner and Ames&#8217;s notion of <a href="http://people.ischool.berkeley.edu/~daniela/files/cscw14-rosner-repair.pdf" target="_blank">&#8220;negotiated endurance&#8221;</a> (2014), or how the lifecycles of devices are negotiated over time (not somehow determined or prebaked into machines), may prove quite informative for labs, makerspaces, and partnerships considering how to build and maintain scholarly infrastructures over time and across distances. As I suggest below, <span class="pullquote">negotiated endurance prompts practitioners to complicate the make-break binary.</span> Concepts and practices such as maintenance, care, negotiation, and even versioning underscore process over product as well as iteration over event (even as the former is increasingly the latter in attention economies), and they may also help us better address Debbie Chachra&#8217;s concerns about the gendering of making and care in <a href="http://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2015/01/why-i-am-not-a-maker/384767/" target="_blank">&#8220;Why I Am Not a Maker&#8221;</a> (2015). In the humanities, maintenance and care are usually performed in the labs, libraries, archives, centers, classrooms, and forums (e.g., <a href="http://digitalhumanities.org/answers/" target="_blank">Digital Humanities Questions and Answers</a>) central to our research yet so difficult to trace through our publications and other scholarly communications.</p>
<p>Finally, my third and fourth concerns more or less assume an awareness of the first two (i.e., techno-evangelism and maintenance): <span class="pullquote">to what degree is fabrication actually relevant to research in the humanities?</span> And what should humanities practitioners know in order to fabricate persuasively? In <a href="http://maker.uvic.ca/scan/" target="_blank">&#8220;Dear Academy: Where’s the Fab?&#8221;</a> (2014), Katherine Goertz and Danielle Morgan share an environmental scan of digital fabrication research happening on campuses across Canada and the United States. From that scan, they learned that hardly any&#8212;and arguably no&#8212;CAM research space in those two countries is based in the humanities. This observation foregrounds at least two possibilities: that digital fabrication is not, in fact, relevant to humanities research, and that, even if it is relevant, humanities practitioners do not have the requisite training for it. Before we accept either possibility, more research might be conducted on when and why humanities work insists on material culture in its 3D state, resisting any flattening for reference and communication. That is, for which methodologies and research areas does material depth especially matter, or when are screen-based expressions clearly insufficient?</p>
<p>Once these methodologies and research areas are identified, a humanities-anchored survey or assessment of how digital fabrication happens across machines and sites may be in order. Although additive 3D printing via desktop machines is most often the subject of popular media, it only scratches the surface of how fabrication actually happens. Not only do the machines and techniques vary widely; the substances do, too. In short, for most research projects (not to mention industry or private sector initiatives), digital fabrication involves far more than a MakerBot, some PLA/ABS, and downloading STL files from Thingiverse. Significant infrastructure, training, trial-and-error learning, and post-production (including manual labor) are involved. If humanities researchers are interested in more than the MakerBot, then they may wish to learn from, support, and collaborate with existing practitioners of digital fabrication. (In my case, I have learned an incredible amount from generous people in fab labs, shops, makerspaces, fine arts, architecture, design, anthropology, and engineering, not to mention Bill Turkel&#8217;s <a href="http://digitalhistoryhacks.blogspot.ca/" target="_blank"><em>Digital History Hacks</em></a>. Not a small chunk of this learning has been tacit or by proxy, and I still have heaps to learn.) These sorts of partnerships may allow curious practitioners to better identify what (if any) fabrication techniques are both relevant and feasible for their research and to then proceed accordingly, <span class="pullquote">articulating their research or research-creation aims with the infrastructures and technocultures they want to see in the world</span>.</p>
<p>With these assumptions and concerns on the table, below are some very brief responses to my initial question: <em>why, if ever, should humanities practitioners fabricate tactile objects as part of their research?</em> Two responses are about methods. Another is about rhetoric, epistemology, and materials design. And the last one is about infrastructure and collaboration. To be sure, the list is far from complete, and it will not appeal to all areas of the humanities. As it unfolds through more ideas and examples, I am looking forward to hearing from my fellow INKE researchers and others who may be interested in humanities fabrication.</p>
<h3>Data Phys</h3>
<p>Over at <a href="http://dataphys.org/list/" target="_blank">dataphys.org</a>, Pierre Dragicevic and Yvonne Jansen have compiled a list of over 180 physical visualizations. (Thanks to Devon Elliott at Western for pointing me to this work.) Well over a majority of them are dated 2000 or after, and each entry is categorized (e.g., &#8220;passive physical visualization&#8221;) and tagged (e.g., &#8220;3d printing,&#8221; &#8220;paper,&#8221; &#8220;knitting,&#8221; and &#8220;arduino&#8221;). Even if physical visualization is not new, it is being remediated in striking ways through algorithms, physical computing, and real-time data gathering techniques. At first glance, this remediation may be reduced to mere re-presentation: whatever is on screen is now in hand, on the wall, or the like. As such, researchers might be inclined to compare data phys to printing a Word document or spreadsheet. However, the humanities may learn a significant amount about transmedia design by constructing or gathering data intended explicitly for tactile interaction, not only to stress the limits of the screen (e.g., a lack of space, difficulties interpreting 3D media with a flat display, or the absence of accessibility) but also to develop projects for public display and interaction. David Staley&#8217;s <a href="http://www.hastac.org/blogs/dstaley/2013/12/11/3-d-printing-data-visualization" target="_blank"><em>FHQ III</em></a> is one example of such work. More generally, though, <span class="pullquote">with data phys we may ask when &#8220;humanities data&#8221; needs to be situated in a specific space and time, or when algorithms need texture.</span> Sure, this method is largely about data aesthetics and data rhetoric, but both of these areas (though often marginalized in the humanities) matter when making arguments about how, say, literature, language, history, and culture are experienced and embodied today. What&#8217;s more, they could make the often abstract and overwhelming aspects of data visualization more tangible for interpretation.</p>
<h3>Remaking or Reassembly</h3>
<p>Material culture studies, as well as media, science, and technology studies, are rife with scholarship on how this became that. Rarely does this scholarship assume that we can reproduce history exactly as it was then. On the contrary, the inquiry may be about what we do not know or cannot access. Informed especially by Devon Elliott, <em>et al.</em> in <a href="http://www.cjc-online.ca/index.php/journal/article/view/2506" target="_blank">&#8220;New Old Things&#8221;</a>, I elaborated on the relevance of such <a href="http://maker.uvic.ca/remaking/">remaking</a> techniques late last year. Here, I simply want to emphasize that <span class="pullquote">fabricating historical artifacts in the present affords an awareness of transduction in the past.</span> For instance, remaking usually requires deconstructing objects into component parts (e.g., for the purposes of digitization) or studying documentation materials such as notebooks, patents, and photographs. Conducting this research in 3D, with tactile media, gives researchers a sense of what&#8217;s lost and gained by any flattening (e.g., onto the screen, into an abstraction, as text). And again, such a gesture need not fall back on claims for authenticity, such as: &#8220;3D representation is more like being there. It is closer to the actuality of history.&#8221; Instead, digitizing, modeling, and fabricating the component parts of the past multiplies how scholars perceive, interpret, and circulate history with technologies as they become available.</p>
<h3>Negotiated Endurance: Beyond Make and Break</h3>
<p>With the material turn in media studies, much has now been written about how the digital is also physical. It is stored somewhere, it degrades and rots, it is intertwined with actuality, and it is embodied. In many ways, digital fabrication foregrounds these claims, or&#8212;better yet&#8212;it foregrounds a sort of digital/analog convergence. Scholars such as Neil Gershenfeld (2005) and Steven E. Jones (2014) have written rather extensively about this convergence. Via William Gibson, Jones unpacks the <a href="http://emergenceofdhbook.tumblr.com/" target="_blank">&#8220;eversion&#8221;</a> (i.e., the internet turned inside out), and Gershenfeld references <a href="http://books.google.ca/books?id=Zw0j50HDwYUC&amp;q=student+walk+out+printer#v=onepage&amp;q&amp;f=false" target="_blank">student theses walking out of 3D printers</a>. However this convergence is ultimately articulated and exemplified, the processes of digital fabrication demonstrate how, between bits and atoms, objects are in constant iteration, undergoing shifts from objects in hand (e.g., as wood or metal) to objects on screen (e.g., G-code in one window, and an OBJ file in another) to objects in hand again (e.g., as acrylic or foam). Here, the variability of Lev Manovich&#8217;s <a href="http://mitpress.mit.edu/books/language-new-media" target="_blank">new media</a> (2001) is instantiated in ways he may not have anticipated in the early 2000s. To be clear, variability is distinct from dichotomies of analog or digital, print or electronic, and even make or break. Through the paradigm of variability (so important to the practice of versioning), <span class="pullquote">we look for stress points along a continuum of material change</span>: points where remaking, remediation, repurposing, modification, alteration, layering, repair, warping, morphing, transformation, and <a href="http://www.nanocrit.com/issues/5/circuit-bending-videogame-consoles-form-applied-media-studies" target="_blank">bending</a> (Belojevic 2014) occurred. Taken together, these stress points foreground the negotiated endurance of material culture.</p>
<p>While this perspective is less conducive than the make-break binary to grand narratives of creation and disruption, it best reflects the actualities of our platforms and their endurance over time. It is also not unique to digital fabrication. Still, digital fabrication lends itself to studying such continuum-based ontologies or epistemologies. Borrowing for a moment from the work of Alan Galey and Stan Ruecker (2010), we can ask whether there is an <a href="http://llc.oxfordjournals.org.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/content/25/4/405" target="_blank">identifiable trajectory</a> across a given continuum of material change, and if so, what is it. <span class="pullquote">Trajectory identification can help practitioners better understand how objects express arguments, represent labor, solidify biases, and favor certain interactions.</span> In the case of digital fabrication, a knowledge of materials design becomes central to such identification and can also enrich an awareness of how historical artifacts were sourced, developed, and discarded (see &#8220;Remaking or Reassembly&#8221; above). Perhaps most important, materials design beyond the make-break binary could work to unravel the cultural, social, and political implications of a now ubiquitous twist on the material turn: that the analog or physical world is programmable and thus reducible to code as its common substrate. Critiques of this twist might be most persuasive when done immanently, that is, through (rather than about) digital fabrication techniques.</p>
<h3>Shared Specs, Shared Concerns</h3>
<p>Maintained by MIT&#8217;s Center for Bits and Atoms, the <a href="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheet/pub?key=0AtIlZyLn99e6dGRleUJTY043a3FucUhFUVVBYTdxS3c&amp;single=true&amp;gid=0&amp;output=html" target="_blank">Fab Lab spec</a> has been crucial to the development of digital fabrication research across the world. Tested and routinely revised, this inventory gives practitioners a shared infrastructure standard, which is especially useful for people, including those of us in the humanities, who are new to the field. Again, the existence of fab labs in the humanities across the United States and Canada is incredibly rare. Hardly any&#8212;and arguably no&#8212;CAM research space in these two countries is based in the humanities. Nonetheless, the very idea of a shared spec may nudge those of us in humanities labs and centers to speak more openly about the composition and everyday of our spaces, not to standardize them, but rather to discuss how infrastructure shapes our research decisions, workflows, and values. For instance, while conducting my own fabrication work, I have determined that collaborating with visual artists, especially artists with experience in sculpture, is an absolute necessity. Not only are they well-versed in the transduction of materials; they are also knowledgeable in, to name but a few, the features, aesthetics, interoperability, maintenance, and exhibition of those materials. Moreover, collaborating with artists through shared infrastructure has deeply influenced my research methodologies and scholarly communication. That said, humanities infrastructures, including emerging fabrication infrastructures, may be tangible opportunities to spark conversations about the social relations, collaborations, and partnerships at play in our research and pedagogy. These conversations may not be about wow or whiz bang, and their focus may be the quotidian. But the everyday is arguably the fundamental stuff of what we do, and <span class="pullquote">a focus on infrastructure, from shared specs to shared concerns, could allow us to more openly discuss how we maintain our physical spaces as research cultures.</span></p>
<p>Miriam Posner (2014) has written about committing to digital humanities people (not just digital humanities projects), with <a href="http://miriamposner.com/blog/commit-to-dh-people-not-dh-projects/" target="_blank">&#8220;a long-term investment in scholarly growth.&#8221;</a> Elsewhere, in <a href=" http://nowviskie.org/2014/anthropocene/ " target="_blank">&#8220;Digital Humanities in the Anthropocene,&#8221;</a> Bethany Nowviskie (2014) asserts: &#8220;We need systems of reward that don’t just value the new, but find nobility in activities like metadata enhancement, project maintenance, and forward migration&#8212;and therefore prompt us to attend to the working conditions of our colleagues in cultural heritage institutions and those who steward DH software and systems.&#8221; These two positions stress how entangled practitioners are with their technologies and systems, and they also point to quotidian work that is all too often ignored, buried somewhere in a change log or notebook. Again, this entanglement and this work are not at all unique to digital fabrication. Yet, given its nascent state, fabrication is an area where humanities practitioners could contribute examples of not only experimental methods and values design but also of how to care for projects after the wow and whiz-bang subside.</p>
<p>The references for &#8220;Why Fabricate?&#8221; are included in this <a href="https://www.zotero.org/jentery/items/collectionKey/62HBMTTF" target="_blank">Zotero library</a>.</p>
<hr />
<p>Post by <a title="learn more" href="http://maker.uvic.ca/author/admin/">Jentery Sayers</a>, attached to the <a title="learn more" href="http://maker.uvic.ca/category/makerspace/">Makerspace</a> project, with the <a title="learn more" href="http://maker.uvic.ca/tag/fabrication/">fabrication</a> tag. Featured image for this post care of Jentery Sayers.</p>
